Revenue Recognition
Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. For any product within these groups that either is software, or is considered software-related (e.g., Mac computers, iPhones and iPod portable digital music and video players), the Company accounts for such products in accordance with the specific industry accounting guidance for software and software related transactions. The Company applies various revenue-related GAAP for products that are not software or software-related, such as digital content sold on the iTunes Store and certain Mac, iPhone and iPod supplies and accessories, which is described below.
The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company legally retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable, revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable and all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met.
Revenue from service and support contracts is deferred and recognized ratably over the service coverage periods. These contracts typically include extended phone support, repair services, web-based support resources, diagnostic tools, and extend the service coverage offered under the Company’s standard limited warranty.
The Company sells software and peripheral products obtained from other companies. The Company generally establishes its own pricing and retains related inventory risk, is the primary obligor in sales transactions with its customers, and assumes the credit risk for amounts billed to its customers. Accordingly, the Company generally recognizes revenue for the sale of products obtained from other companies based on the gross amount billed.
The Company accounts for multiple element arrangements that consist only of software or software-related products in accordance with industry specific accounting guidance for software and software related transactions. If a multiple-element arrangement includes deliverables that are neither software nor software-related, the Company applies various revenue-related GAAP to determine if those deliverables constitute separate units of accounting from the software or software-related deliverables. If the Company can separate the deliverables, the Company applies the industry specific accounting guidance to the software and software-related deliverables and applies other appropriate guidance to the non-software related deliverables. Revenue on arrangements that include multiple elements such as hardware, software and services is allocated to each element based on the
 
relative fair value of each element. Each element’s allocated revenue is recognized when the revenue recognition criteria for that element have been met. Fair value is generally determined by vendor specific objective evidence (“VSOE”), which is based on the price charged when each element is sold separately. If the Company cannot objectively determine the fair value of any undelivered element included in a multiple-element arrangement, the Company defers revenue until all elements are delivered and services have been performed, or until fair value can objectively be determined for any remaining undelivered elements. When the fair value of a delivered element has not been established, but fair value exists for the undelivered elements, the Company uses the residual method to recognize revenue if the fair value of all undelivered elements is determinable. Under the residual method, the fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred and the remaining portion of the arrangement fee is allocated to the delivered elements and is recognized as revenue.
For both iPhone and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time-to-time provide future unspecified features and additional software products free of charge to customers. Accordingly, iPhone handsets and Apple TV sales are accounted for under subscription accounting in accordance with GAAP. As such, the revenue and associated cost of sales are deferred at the time of sale, and are both recognized on a straight-line basis over the currently estimated 24-month economic life of these products, with any loss recognized at the time of sale. Costs incurred by the Company for engineering, sales, marketing and warranty are expensed as incurred.
The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. The estimated cost of these programs is accrued as a reduction to revenue in the period the Company has sold the product and committed to a plan. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Revenue is recorded net of taxes collected from customers that are remitted to governmental authorities, with the collected taxes recorded as current liabilities until remitted to the relevant government authority.
Generally, the Company does not offer specified or unspecified upgrade rights to its customers in connection with software sales or the sale of extended warranty and support contracts. When the Company does offer specified upgrade rights, the Company defers revenue for the fair value of the specified upgrade right until the future obligation is fulfilled or the right to the specified upgrade expires. A limited number of the Company’s software products are available with maintenance agreements that grant customers rights to unspecified future upgrades over the maintenance term on a when and if available basis. Revenue associated with such maintenance is recognized ratably over the maintenance term.
